<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>An Insult</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="an-insult" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">An Insult</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">(An Actual Occurrence)</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was five o’clock in the afternoon of an intolerably hot July day. The whole gigantic city, made of stone, was exhaling heat like a hot stove. The white walls of the houses glittered painfully. The asphalt sidewalks were soft and burned the soles. Even the acacia shade seemed hot as it fell on the sidewalk. The sea seemed dead as it lay heavy and motionless under the glaring sun. White dust was whirling through the streets.</p>
			<p>In the foyer of a local theatre, a small group of lawyers who had undertaken to conduct gratis the cases of the people who suffered during the late Jewish massacre was finishing its session. There were nineteen of them, all young lawyers, conscientious, and men of modern ideas. The session did not require any formality, and most of them were dressed in flannels and suits of lustring. They were sitting by twos and threes at small marble tables, while the chairman sat behind the empty counter, at which candy was sold in the winter.</p>
			<p>The heat streaming through the open window, together with the blinding sunlight and the noises of the street, wearied the lawyers almost to exhaustion. The whole atmosphere of the session seemed to be charged with indolence and irritability.</p>
			<p>The tall young man with light mustaches and thin hair, who was acting as the chairman, was dreaming of how he would ride to his country house on his new bicycle, would undress quickly, and plunge into the clear, fragrant, cooling sea. At these thoughts his whole body quivered slightly. At the same time, he looked through the papers before him impatiently, and said in a drowsy tone:</p>
			<p>“And so, gentlemen, Joseph Moritzovich is going to take charge of the Rubinchik case. Is there anything else in the order of the day?”</p>
			<p>The youngest of the lawyers, a short, stout, dark, and lively Karaite, said in a low voice, but so that everybody heard him:</p>
			<p>“The best thing in the order of the day is a glass of iced kvass.”</p>
			<p>The chairman glanced at him sternly, but could not hold back a smile. He sighed, and had already placed his elbows on the table, preparing to rise and declare the session closed, when the doorman stepped in and said:</p>
			<p>“Your Honor, there are seven fellows outside asking to be let in.”</p>
			<p>The chairman glanced at his comrades impatiently.</p>
			<p>“What do you say, gentlemen?”</p>
			<p>Several replies came at once.</p>
			<p>“Let them wait until the next meeting.”</p>
			<p>“Let them send in a written statement.”</p>
			<p>“Maybe it won’t take long.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, let them go now.”</p>
			<p>“It’s too hot for anything.”</p>
			<p>“Let them come in,” said the chairman in an irritable tone, “and then please bring me a glass of <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Narzan</i>. But see that it’s cold, please.”</p>
			<p>The doorman opened the door.</p>
			<p>“Come in. They will see you.”</p>
			<p>Then seven of the most unexpected and the most incredible personages filed into the foyer. The first of them was tall, had every appearance of self-confidence, and was dressed in a frock coat of the color of dry sea-sand, and a white shirt with pink stripes. A red rose was in the buttonhole of his coat. His head, when one looked at his face, appeared like a bean standing on end; looking at him from the side, it resembled a bean lying flat. His face was ornamented by curled-up mustaches and a fashionable little beard. He wore a pair of dark-blue spectacles and a pair of straw-colored gloves. In his left hand he held a black cane with a silver head, and in his right, a blue handkerchief. The other six men produced a strange, absurd, and variegated impression. It seemed as though they had interchanged not only clothes, but arms, legs, and heads as well. One of them was a man with the stately profile of a Roman senator, but was dressed in rags. Another wore a fine white waistcoat, beneath which was a dirty, Little-Russian shirt. Some of the faces were of the asymmetrical prisoner type, but they were full of unshaken self-confidence. And all these men, despite their apparent youth, evidently possessed great experience; far from being shy, they were aggressive and full of concealed, suspicious slyness.</p>
			<p>The gentleman in the sand-colored frock coat bowed his head politely, and said in a tone of interrogation:</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chairman?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” answered the chairman. “What can I do for you?”</p>
			<p>“All of us whom you see before you,” said the man calmly, and, turning, he made a sweeping motion with his hand toward his comrades, “are the delegates of the United Rostov-Kharkov and Odessa-Nikolayev Organization of Thieves.”</p>
			<p>The lawyers moved about uneasily. The chairman sat back in his chair with his eyes wide open.</p>
			<p>“The organization of whom?” asked he in perplexity.</p>
			<p>“The organization of thieves,” repeated the gentleman of the sand-colored frock coolly. “As for me personally, my comrades have done me the honor of choosing me as the representative of the delegation.”</p>
			<p>“We are very glad⁠ ⁠…” said the chairman.</p>
			<p>“Thank you. The seven of us are ordinary thieves, specialists in different fields, of course. Our organization has empowered us to present to your dignified assembly,” the gentleman again bowed graciously, “our most respectful appeal for help.”</p>
			<p>“Why, I do not exactly understand⁠ ⁠…” said the chairman in still greater perplexity. “But continue, please.”</p>
			<p>“The matter concerning which we have the honor and take the courage of applying to you, gentlemen, is very simple and clear. It will not take me more than six or seven minutes to relate the circumstances to you, and I feel it my duty to warn you of this in view of the lateness of the hour and the fact that the Réaumur thermometer shows 37 in the shade.” The orator coughed, and glanced at his watch. “Some of the local newspapers in their reports concerning the unfortunate and dreadful days of the late massacre, have recently begun to intimate that among the murderers hired by the police, those bands of drunkards, bums, cadets, and other similar persons recruited from the slums, were also thieves. At first we ignored this, but now we consider ourselves compelled to protest before society against this unjust and heavy accusation. I know very well that, from the point of view of law, we are criminals and enemies of society. But imagine for a moment, gentlemen, the situation of these enemies of society when they are accused of committing a crime which they did not commit and will never commit. Surely, there is no doubt that they will feel the insult of such an injustice much more acutely than the ordinary person. And’ so we declare that the accusation which has been brought against us is not only false, but illogical. And I hope to be able to prove it in a few words if this dignified assembly will consent to give me a hearing.”</p>
			<p>“Proceed,” said the chairman.</p>
			<p>“Please, please,” was heard from several of the lawyers.</p>
			<p>“I am sure, gentlemen, that both I and my comrades are sincerely grateful to you. Permit me to assure you that you will never regret your attention to the representatives of our, perhaps shady, but at the same time unfortunate and difficult profession. And so, we begin, as sings Giraldoni in the prologue of <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Pagliacci</i>.</p>
			<p>“Before I begin, may I ask, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chairman, for permission to quench my thirst? Here, boy, will you please bring me a glass of lemonade and a little English whiskey?⁠—I shall not speak, gentlemen, of the moral side of our trade and of its social significance. You are acquainted better than I with that marvellous, brilliant paradox of Proudhon, ‘Property is theft,’ a paradox which has not as yet been overturned by all the prattle of cowardly middle-class people and fat priests. Let me illustrate what I mean. A man may be an energetic and clever robber and succeed in amassing a million of roubles, which he leaves to his rachitic, ignorant son, a degenerate idiot, a spineless worm, a true parasite. A million roubles is potentially a million working days, the right to the labor, the sweat, the blood, and the life of an enormous number of people. What for? Why? No one knows. And so, gentlemen, why not agree to the proposition that our profession is, to a certain extent, a corrective to the situation which permits too great a concentration of wealth in single hands, which is a protest against all abominations, arbitrary rules, violence, contempt for human personality, against all those abominations brought into being by the capitalist order of present-day society. Sooner or later, a social revolution must overturn this order of things. Property will then become a sad recollection of the past, and then, alas! we, too, shall disappear from the face of the earth, we, <i xml:lang="fr">les braves chevaliers d’industrie</i>.”</p>
			<p>The orator paused for a moment, took a tray from the hands of the doorman, and placed it on the table by his side.</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon. Here, boy, and when you go out please close the door after you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir, your Excellency,” shouted the doorman joyfully.</p>
			<p>The orator drank half the glass, and then continued:</p>
			<p>“Then let us set aside the philosophical, economic, and social phases of the question. Without any desire to tire you, I must, however, say that our profession is very near what is generally known as art, because it is made up of all the elements which go to make up art, <abbr>viz.</abbr>: inspiration, a calling, imagination, resourcefulness, ambition, and a long process of learning. From it, alas! is absent only virtue, concerning which our great Karamzin wrote with such brilliant and fiery enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, I am far from the desire to play the buffoon before this dignified assembly, or to waste your precious time with aimless paradoxes. Yet I must needs prove, however briefly, the thought which I have stated. It may sound absurd and even amusing to hear of a thief’s vocation. There are men who possess a remarkable visual memory, keenness and accuracy of eye, coolness, skill with their fingers, and a remarkably keen sense of touch. Such men must have been born into the world to be splendid sharpers. The pickpocket’s trade requires of its devotees quickness and accuracy, besides resourcefulness, powers of observation, and focused attention. Some have a calling to be safe-blowers; from early childhood they are attracted irresistibly by the mysteries of all sorts of complicated mechanisms, bicycles, sewing-machines, mechanical toys, watches. Finally, gentlemen of the legal profession, there are men born with a feeling of hereditary enmity toward other men’s property. You choose to call this phenomenon degeneration. Just as you like. But I say that a real thief, a thief by dint of natural instinct, cannot be tempted to change his profession for the honest existence; neither well-paid positions, nor abundance of money, nor a woman’s love can win him. For here he has the charm of risk, the fascinating abyss of dangers, the rapid beating of the heart, the boisterous joy of life! You are armed with the arm of the law, with locks, revolvers, telephones, police, armies, while we have skill, craftiness, and courage for our protection. We are foxes, while society is a chickencoop, guarded by dogs. Do you know that in our villages the most artistic and talented of men become horse-thieves and poachers? What can they do if life is so poor, so faulty, so unbearable for passionate hearts?</p>
			<p>“But I must proceed to the question of inspiration. There is no doubt that you, gentlemen, have read about burglaries almost superhuman in plan and execution. In the newspapers they usually have headings like the following: ‘A Colossal Theft,’ or ‘An Incredible Burglary.’ And in such cases the heads of bourgeois families exclaim: ‘What an unfortunate thing! If the resourcefulness of these outlaws, their remarkable knowledge of human psychology, their self-control and bravery, their wonderful powers of acting were only turned in the right direction! How much good they might do for the country!’ But it has long been known, gentlemen, that the heads of bourgeois families were made by the great Creator for the purpose of saying generalities and insipid things. It has even happened to me⁠—I must admit, gentlemen, that we, thieves, are rather sentimental⁠—to stand in a park or at the seashore, admiring the beautiful sunset, and I never failed to hear somebody near me say, ‘And if some artist should paint a picture like this, nobody would believe him,’ and when I turned around, I always beheld a self-satisfied, fat, complacent head of a family who is overjoyed at his own stupidity after having repeated a stupid remark of somebody else’s. As for the country, the bourgeois regards it as he would a fat turkey; his only desire is to get the best piece he can and eat it in some secluded spot, and praise God. However, this is beside the point. My hatred for everything insipid has led me to digress, and I shall have to apologize for unnecessary words. But the point is that genius and inspiration, even though they are not turned to the use of the Orthodox Church, are still rare and beautiful things. Everything in the world progresses and there is creative activity even in the thieves’ profession.</p>
			<p>“Finally, our trade is not so easy and pleasant as it may seem at first sight. It requires long experience, constant exercise, slow and painful training. It consists of hundreds of careful and skilful feats, which are accessible only to the most expert of tricksters. But I should not like to speak to you without offering you any proofs, and I shall therefore, gentlemen, permit myself to perform a few experiments before you. I wish to assure you that all those taking part in it are perfectly safe. All of us are legally free at the present time, and although it is certain that we are followed, and our faces are well known, while our photographs ornament the albums of all the police offices, still, at the present time, we have no need to conceal ourselves from anybody. If, at some future time, you should happen to recognize any one of us in different circumstances, please conduct yourself in accordance with your professional duties, as well as your obligations as citizens. As an expression of our gratitude to you for your kind attention, we have decided to declare inviolable your private property, to place it under the thieves’ taboo. However, let us proceed.”</p>
			<p>Turning back, the orator said:</p>
			<p>“Sysoy the Great, step forward.”</p>
			<p>A gigantic, round-shouldered fellow, with his hands reaching nearly to the knees, a man almost without forehead and neck, having the appearance of a sleepy circus giant, moved forward. He was smiling stupidly, and, to hide his emotion, kept scratching his left eyebrow.</p>
			<p>“But there is nothing for me to do here,” said he in a hoarse voice.</p>
			<p>But the gentleman of the sand-colored suit was already addressing the assembly:</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, you see before you a much respected member of our organization. His specialty is opening trunks, blowing safes, and other depositories of valuables. Sometimes, in the course of his evening work, he has to make use of electric current taken from light transmission, in order to fuse metal parts. Unfortunately, there is nothing here on which he can show his best numbers. He can open faultlessly any door with the most complicated lock mechanism. By the way, this door is locked, I take it?”</p>
			<p>Everybody turned around to look at the door over which there was a sign reading: “Strangers are not allowed behind the scenes.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, this door is evidently locked,” said the chairman.</p>
			<p>“Splendid. Sysoy the Great, will you be so kind?”</p>
			<p>“That’s nothing at all,” said the giant contemptuously.</p>
			<p>He walked up to the door, shook it a little, carefully, with one hand, then took out of his pocket a small shining instrument, and made a few scarcely perceptible motions with it as he bent over the lock. Then, suddenly, he stood up and opened the door quickly and noiselessly. The chairman followed his motions with a watch in his hand: the whole operation did not take more than ten seconds.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Sysoy the Great,” said the gentleman of the sand-colored suit politely. “You may return to your place.”</p>
			<p>But the chairman objected with a little alarm:</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon. All this is very interesting and instructive. But tell me is the art of locking doors also a part of your colleague’s art?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, <i xml:lang="fr">mille pardons</i>!” The gentleman bowed hastily. “I had forgotten that. Sysoy the Great, won’t you be so kind?”</p>
			<p>The door was locked just as skilfully and noiselessly. The colleague returned to his place, waddling and smiling.</p>
			<p>“Now, I shall have the honor of exhibiting to you the art of one of our representatives whose work consists in picking pockets in theatres and railroad-stations,” continued the orator. “He is very young, but by his skill you can judge to a certain extent of what he will develop into with the proper amount of application. Yasha!”</p>
			<p>A dark young man, wearing a blue silk shirt and patent-leather boots, who resembled a gypsy, walked forward, perfectly at ease, and paused beside the orator, playing with the tassels of his belt, and winking merrily with his large, insolent, black eyes.</p>
			<p>The gentleman of the sand-colored suit said:</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, I shall have to ask you, if one of you would not agree to submit himself to a little experiment. I assure you it will amount to nothing but play.”</p>
			<p>He looked at the lawyers before him. The short, stout, black Karaite stepped forward from behind his table.</p>
			<p>“I am at your service,” said he, with a twinkle in his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Yasha!” The orator nodded to the young thief.</p>
			<p>Yasha walked up to the lawyer. In his left hand there was a piece of embroidered silk cloth.</p>
			<p>“If, for instance, in a church or, let us say, in the theatre or the circus,” he began in a soft, thin voice, “I see a ’frayer’⁠ ⁠… I beg your pardon, sir, something like you⁠ ⁠… there is nothing insulting in this word. It simply means a decently dressed gentleman who is likely to notice very little. Well, in the first place, what objects can there be? Why, there are all sorts of things. We usually start with the watch. Again, where can you find it? Some carry their watches in the upper vest pocket, right here, and some in the lower pocket, over here. The pocketbook is usually in the trousers pocket. Except when some fool will put it in his coat pocket. Then again, there is a cigarette-case. Of course the first thing to do is to see whether it is gold or silver, because what self-respecting man would even think of bothering with a leather cigarette-case? Now a cigarette-case may be in one of seven pockets: here, here, here, over here, here, over there, or here. Isn’t that right? So we act accordingly.”</p>
			<p>Saying this the young thief smiled, looking the lawyer straight in the face and pointing to the different parts of his clothes with rapid motions of his right hand.</p>
			<p>“Again we might take a look at his pin. But we do not take it nowadays, except very rarely. It is very seldom now that men wear real stones, and so I come up and speak to him most politely: ‘May I have a match, sir?’ Or something else. At any rate, I start up a conversation. And I look him straight in the eyes like this. And I work with only two fingers, this one and that one.”</p>
			<p>Yasha raised his right hand to the level of his face and moved the index and the middle finger.</p>
			<p>“Did you see that? The whole music lies in these two fingers. And there is nothing wonderful in this at all: one, two, three, and the thing is done! Any man who is fairly clever can learn the trick easily. That’s all. A very ordinary thing. Well, thank you.”</p>
			<p>The thief turned around and started walking back to his place.</p>
			<p>“Yasha!” said the gentleman of the sand-colored suit weightily and significantly. “Ya⁠—sha!” he repeated sternly.</p>
			<p>Yasha paused. His back was turned to the lawyer, but it was evident that his eyes were begging something of the orator, for the latter knitted his brows and shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Yasha!” he said for the third time, this time with a threat in his voice.</p>
			<p>“Well⁠ ⁠… !” exclaimed the young thief angrily, and turned again slowly toward the lawyer. “And where is your watch, sir?” said he in a thin voice.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” exclaimed the lawyer.</p>
			<p>“Now you see,” continued Yasha reproachfully, “you were watching my right hand all the time and I was using my left hand to get your watch. The whole thing was done with these two fingers under this bit of cloth. That’s what I have the cloth for. And as your chain is not worth much, just a string that some lady must have given you, I left it to you as a souvenir. Here you are,” added he with a sigh, returning the watch.</p>
			<p>“Isn’t that skilful!” said the lawyer a little shamefacedly. “I didn’t notice it at all.”</p>
			<p>“That’s our trade,” remarked Yasha proudly.</p>
			<p>Then he returned to his colleagues. The orator in the meantime drank a little lemonade and then continued:</p>
			<p>“And now, gentlemen, another of our colleagues here will show you a few ordinary card tricks which are in use on ferries, boats, and railroad-trains. With the use of three cards, for example, a queen, an ace, and a six, he can easily.⁠ ⁠… But perhaps, gentlemen, our experiments have bored you?”</p>
			<p>“No, not at all; all this is extremely interesting,” answered the chairman politely. “But I should like to ask you, if my question will not strike you as indiscreet, what your own specialty is?”</p>
			<p>“My own? Why it would not be indiscreet at all. I work in large jewelry shops and also in banks,” replied the orator with a modest smile. “But do not think that my trade is easier than others. In the first place I know four European languages to perfection: German, French, English, and Italian, not counting Polish, Ruthenian, and Jewish. And so, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chairman, shall I continue the demonstration?”</p>
			<p>The chairman glanced at his watch.</p>
			<p>“Unfortunately, we have too little time left,” said he. “Would it not be best to come to the matter itself? Especially since the experiments which we have just witnessed have convinced us sufficiently of the skill of your colleagues. Is this so, Isaac Abramovich?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed!” readily agreed the lawyer.</p>
			<p>“Very well,” agreed the gentleman of the sand-colored suit. ” Grafchik,” said he, turning to a curly-haired, blond fellow, “put your little device away. It won’t be needed. I wish to add but a few words, gentlemen. Now that you have convinced yourselves of the fact that our art, even though it does not enjoy the enlightened patronage of personages in high stations of life, is nevertheless an art, if you have, perhaps, agreed with me that it is an art which requires many personal qualifications besides constant labor, danger, and unpleasantness, you will believe me, I hope, that it is possible to become attached to our art and, no matter how strange it may appear at first sight, to love and to respect it. Now imagine that a well-known and talented poet, whose legends and poems ornament the pages of our best magazine, suddenly receives an order to write an advertisement in verse for some brand of cigarettes signed with his name and for which he will be paid at the rate of three copecks per line? Or suppose that one of you, brilliant and famous lawyers, should be suddenly accused of dealing in perjury for divorce cases or of writing petitions for teamsters in some tavern? Of course your friends and relatives and even your acquaintances will not believe this, but the rumor itself will cause you unpleasantness and may result in painful experiences. And now imagine that this disgraceful slander, originated by someone unknown to you, threatens not only your good name and normal digestion but your liberty, your health, your very life?</p>
			<p>“This is precisely the situation in which we, thieves, find ourselves after being slandered by the newspapers. Permit me to make a remark here. There is a category of scamps⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">passez moi le mot</i>⁠—whom we call ’mothers’ sons’ and with whom, alas! we are sometimes mixed. These men are without shame or conscience, a set of beggars, idiots, sluggards, drones of clerks who steal without knowing how. They are ready to live upon money provided by a prostitute, like the male mackerel who swims after the female and feeds on its ejections; they will attack a child in a dark alley in order to take three copecks away from him; they will murder a sleeping man or torture an old woman. These are the scourge of our trade. The charms and the traditions of the art do not exist for them. They follow us, real, skilful thieves, as jackals follow a lion. Let us say that I have succeeded in making a large theft. But I want to dispose of the goods. I leave two-thirds of their value in the hands of moneylenders who buy them from me; I have to give a part of it to these scamps if they happen to hear anything about my work. I call them motients, which comes from the word <i xml:lang="fr">moitié</i>, meaning a half or what is spoiled; strange philology, I agree. I have to pay him money because he knows something and might inform the police. And it often happens that after receiving the money that I give him, he still runs to the police, betrays me, and earns an extra five roubles. We, honest thieves⁠ ⁠… yes, yes, gentlemen, you may laugh, but still I say, we, honest thieves, despise these reptiles. We have another name for them, shameful as a brand, but I dare not say it here out of respect to the place and to the company. Oh, yes, they will readily accept an invitation to take part in a massacre, but the mere thought that we can be classed together with them is a hundred times more insulting to us than even the accusation that we took part in the massacre.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, as I spoke, I noticed several times that there was a smile on your faces. I understand you perfectly: our presence here, our appeal for help, finally the very existence of such an unexpected phenomenon as a systematic organization of thieves, sending its delegation consisting of thieves and the delegation being represented by a professional thief⁠—all this is so original and so new that it cannot but cause you to smile. But now I shall speak from the bottom of my heart. Gentlemen, let us throw aside our outer integuments. Let us talk as men to men.</p>
			<p>“We are all literate, we all like to read, and we read not only the fantastic adventures that our writers choose to invent in order to represent our work. Do you think that our hearts did not bleed, our cheeks did not burn, as after a blow, during that whole, unfortunate, disgraceful, cursed, and shameful war? And do you think that our souls are not full of wrath when our country is trampled under foot, is shot to death, beaten with the whip, and spat upon by wild, beast-like men? Is it possible that you will not believe us when we say that we, thieves, greet with endless joy every step of the liberation?</p>
			<p>“Each one of us understands, perhaps as well as you lawyers, the real significance of these massacres. Following every great crime or a shameful failure, whether it be the execution of a martyr, in some dark corner of a prison, or the loss of popular confidence, someone hidden and invisible becomes afraid of the possible wrath of the people and leads it into the channels of Jewish massacres. Some diabolical mind invents these massacres, these gigantic cupping-glasses, these cannibalistic games for darkened souls.</p>
			<p>“But we all realize that the bureaucracy is in its last throes. Will you forgive me if I speak figuratively? A certain people had a large temple in which, behind a screen, dwelt a bloody divinity, protected by priests. Human lives were sacrificed to this divinity. But once, the hands of some great men tore away the screen, and then everyone saw that in the place of a god there was a gigantic, greedy spider. Then they shot at the spider, tore him to pieces, but even in the fury of his last agony, he stretched out his limbs throughout the ancient temple. And the priests themselves, already condemned to death, put within the reach of this monster all those whom they could grasp with their fingers, shaking with terror.</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon. What I said was undoubtedly wild and meaningless. But I am somewhat excited. I beg your pardon. I shall continue now. We, professional thieves, know better than anybody else how these massacres are organized. We go everywhere, to the slums and the marketplace, and the eating-rooms and the lodging-houses, and the public squares and the docks. And we can swear before God, before men, and before the future generations, that we ourselves see how shamelessly, almost openly, the police organize these dreadful massacres. We know the police, every one of them, no matter how they are disguised. They invite many of us to take part, but even the lowest scoundrel among us refuses to give even a false, forced consent.</p>
			<p>“You know, of course, how everybody in Russia regards the police? They do not enjoy the respect even of those who make use of their services. But we despise them and hate them three or ten times more. And not because many of us were tortured in police-houses, in those actual torture-chambers, where we were beaten with rods, with rubber sticks, and like instruments in order to torture us into confession or a betrayal of our comrades. Of course we hate them for that. But we, thieves, who had tasted of imprisonment, love liberty with mad passion. And for that reason we hate all prison officers with the bitterest hatred of which the human heart is capable. Let me say a word about myself. I was tortured three times by the police. My lungs and my liver are scarcely fit for use. Every morning there is blood in my saliva. And if I were given assurances that I were to ward off another torture like that by merely shaking hands with the chief of police, I would refuse to do it.</p>
			<p>“And now, the newspapers say that we took from the hands of the police this money of Judas, dipped in fresh human blood. Now, gentlemen, this is slander which pains us to our very soul. Neither money nor threats nor promises will ever make us hired fratricides or their accomplices.”</p>
			<p>“No, no!” came from the orator’s companions. “Never!”</p>
			<p>“I shall say even more,” continued the thief. “Many of us even protected the victims of the massacre. Our friend here, who is usually known as Sysoy the Great⁠—you saw him but a minute ago, gentlemen⁠—was staying at that time with a Jew on the Moldavanka. With an iron poker in his hands he saved his host from the hands of a whole crowd of murderers. It is true, of course, that Sysoy the Great is possessed of gigantic physical strength, and this fact is well known to many of the inhabitants of the Moldavanka. But you will surely agree with me, gentlemen, that at that moment Sysoy the Great looked death straight in the face. Another of our colleagues, Martin the Miner,” and the orator pointed to a pale, bearded man with beautiful eyes, who was standing behind the rest, “saved an old Jewish woman utterly unknown to him, when the crowd of this rabble was pursuing her. His head was broken with a piece of iron, his hand was injured in two places, and one of his ribs was broken. He has just left the hospital. This is how the stronger and the more passionate of us acted. The others were shaking with wrath and weeping in their impotence.</p>
			<p>“Not one of us will ever forget the horrors of those bloody days, of those nights illumined by the flames of conflagrations, of those cries of women, of those tortured childish corpses mutilated and disfigured beyond recognition. And not one of us believes that the police or the rabble are the cause of this awful massacre. These little, stupid, disgusting beasts are but the brainless fist ruled by a dastardly clever brain, excited by a devilish will.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Yes, gentlemen of the legal profession,” continued the orator, “we are thieves and we deserve your contempt. But when you, better men, will need brave, skilful, and obedient fellows for your barricades, men who will meet death joyfully and gladly for the sake of the best word in the whole world, ‘Liberty,’ is it possible that you will drive us away simply because of your old aversion?</p>
			<p>“Why, the devil! The first victim of the French Revolution was a prostitute. She mounted on the barricade, tucked up her skirts, and shouted: ‘Now, soldiers, which of you will dare to fire at a woman?’ The devil!” exclaimed the orator in a loud voice, striking the marble table with his fist. “She was killed, but, by God! her action was magnificent and her words immortally beautiful!</p>
			<p>“If, at that great moment, you will drive us away, we shall say to you, ‘O spotless cherubim! But do you know that if human thoughts could wound and kill and deprive men of honor and property, which of you, O innocent doves, would not be worthy of the knout and prison?’ And then we shall go away from you and construct our own desperate barricade, and we shall die with song on our lips. Will you not envy us then!</p>
			<p>“However, I become excited, and I beg your pardon. I shall finish. You see, gentlemen, how our feelings were aroused by the slander that the newspapers heaped upon us. Believe us that we are sincere, and do something to clear us of this bloody and disgraceful spot with which we have been so unjustly branded. I have finished.”</p>
			<p>He walked away from the table and joined his comrades. The lawyers were whispering among themselves, just as judges do during a trial. Then the chairman arose and said:</p>
			<p>“We trust you absolutely, and we shall do everything in our power to clear you of this unjust accusation. At the same time my colleagues have requested me to express to you, gentlemen, our profound respect for your ardent civic feelings. As for myself, I should like to ask the representative of the delegation for the privilege of shaking hands with him.”</p>
			<p>And these two tall and serious men shook hands.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The lawyers were leaving the theatre. But four of them stopped for a few minutes, looking for their things. Isaac Abramovich could not find his new gray hat. In its place was hanging a cap bent out of shape.</p>
			<p>“Yasha!” was suddenly heard from the outside. The recent orator was saying in a stern voice: “Yasha, I say it to you for the last time, the devil take you! Do you hear? Well?”</p>
			<p>The heavy door opened. In stepped the gentleman of the sand-colored suit. He was holding the gray hat in his hands; on his face was a polite, pleasant smile.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, I beg your pardon. A rather unpleasant, funny incident took place. One of our comrades inadvertently took this hat instead of his cap. Oh, it is yours? I beg your pardon. Here, doorman, why don’t you keep your eye on things, eh? Here, let me have that cap now. Once more, I beg your pardon, gentlemen.”</p>
			<p>And bowing most politely, with the same pleasant smile on his lips, he quickly walked out into the street.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
