<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="foreword" epub:type="foreword z3998:editorial-note">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Foreword</h2>
			<p>This edition of Alexsandr Kuprin’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Short Fiction</i> was produced from various translations. “The River of Life,” “Captain Ribnikov,” “The Outrage,” and “The Witch” were translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Koteliansky and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M.</abbr> Murry and originally published in 1916. “A Slav Soul,” “The Song and the Dance,” “Easter Day,” “The Idiot,” “The Picture,” “Hamlet,” “Mechanical Justice,” “The Last Word,” “The White Poodle,” “The Elephant,” “Dogs’ Happiness,” “A Clump of Lilacs,” “Tempting Providence,” and “Cain” were translated by Stephen Graham and Rosa Savory Graham and also originally published in 1916. “The Bracelet of Garnets,” “The Horse-Thieves,” “Anathema,” “The Laestrygonians,” “The Park of Kings,” “An Evening Guest,” “A Legend,” “Demir-Kayá,” and “The Garden of the Holy Virgin” were translated by Leo Pasvolsky and originally published in 1919. “Sasha,” “A Sentimental Romance,” “The Army Ensign,” “Autumn Flowers,” “Emerald,” “Happiness,” “How I Became an Actor,” “Allez!,” “Black Fog,” “The Murderer,” “Measles,” and “The Jewess” were translated by Douglas Ashby and originally published in 1920. “<span xml:lang="fr">Le Coq d’Or</span>” was translated by <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Living Age</i> and originally published in 1922. “Sulamith” was translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Guilbert Guerney and originally published in 1923. “The Piebald Horses” was translated by Alexander Gagarine and also originally published in 1923. “The Little Red Christmas Tree” was translated by Malcolm <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Davis and also originally published in 1923. “Monte Carlo,” “Roach Hole,” “The Disciple,” and “The Old City of Marseilles” were translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Guilbert Guerney and originally published in 1925.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Robin Whittleton</p>
				<p>Malmö, Sweden, October 2021</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
