<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Jewess</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-jewess" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Jewess</h2>
			<p>"We have gone past, we have gone past!" a childish voice rang out piteously. "To the right!" some one shouted behind, in an angry bass. "To the right, right, right!" somebody caught up in front, hastily and merrily. Somebody ground his teeth, somebody whistled loudly.… A pack of dogs began to bark in a high and merry pitch. "<i>Ho-ho-ho! Ha-ha-ha!</i>" the crowd laughed and groaned.</p>
			<p>The sleigh struck a rut and jumped up. Kashintzev opened his eyes.</p>
			<p>"What is it?" he asked in fright.</p>
			<p>But the road was as silent and as deserted as before. The cold night was still, as it hung over the endless, dead, white fields. The full moon was standing in the centre of the sky, and a distinct, blue shadow that glided along by the side of the sleigh, breaking up the piles of snow, was short and ugly. The hard, dry snow was squeaking and whining under the runners, as though it were made of rubber.</p>
			<p>"Oh, it's the snow," thought Kashintzev. "Isn't it strange?" he said aloud.</p>
			<p>Hearing his voice, the driver turned around. His dark face, with its beard and mustaches whitened by the cold, resembled a large, rough, animal mask, with pieces of cotton glued to it.</p>
			<p>"What? Two versts. It isn't far," said he.</p>
			<p>"It is only the snow," thought Kashintzev, again beginning to doze. "It is only the snow. Isn't that strange?"</p>
			<p>"Strange, strange!" The little bell attached to the end of the shaft suddenly rang out hastily and distinctly. "Strange, strange, strange.…"</p>
			<p>"<i>Ay-ay-ay!</i> Look at that!" shouted a woman who was walking in front of the sleigh. The crowd which was coming toward her suddenly began to speak, cry, and sing. Again the dogs began to bark angrily.</p>
			<p>The signal of the locomotive was heard far ahead.… And immediately through his drowsiness, Kashintzev recalled with remarkable distinctness the railroad-station restaurant with its pitiful, dusty luxury, its electric lamps hung under the dirty ceiling and on the stained walls, the enormous windows, the artificial palms standing on the table, the stiff, upright napkins, the vases, the bouquets of dried grass, the pyramids of bottles, the pink and green wine-glasses.…</p>
			<p>It was on the night before that a few of his friends gathered to see Kashintzev off, as he was leaving for his new position — to be assistant surgeon of an infantry regiment stationed somewhere in an out-of-the-way place. There were five of them. Bringing the heavy chairs around the corner table, which was usually used by physicians, they drank beer and conversed with artificial sincerity and assumed liveliness, as though they were going through a theatrical performance. The handsome and self-confident Rul, his eyes glistening unnaturally, looking around to see that everybody in the room heard him, said in a tone of fatuous familiarity:</p>
			<p>"So it goes, old man. Our whole life from birth to death consists of meeting each other and then separating again. You might put that down in a book entitled, <i>The Evening Aphorisms and Maxims of Doctor Von Rul</i>."</p>
			<p>Immediately after he had finished, a fat official with a face that reminded one of an angry bulldog, appeared in the doorway, shook a bell, and then shouted in a singing tone, breaking off and choking every little while:</p>
			<p>"First be-ell. Ki-ev, Zhmerinka, Odessa. The train sta-ands on track number two."</p>
			<p>And now, riding in this uncomfortable and bumping sleigh, Kashintzev laughed merrily as he thought of how distinct and detailed were his recollections. But almost immediately the tiresome, sickening impressions of the endless monotony of his journey returned to him. It was only about six or seven hours since he had started out of the small railroad-station to which his train brought him, embarking upon this sleigh journey, but it seemed to Kashintzev that he had been riding that way for weeks and months, that he himself had already changed, had become older, more wearied, and more indifferent to everything around him than he was the night before. Somewhere on his way he had met a beggar, drunk and ragged, with an ugly hole instead of a nose, and with his shoulder bare despite the cold; somewhere a long, thin horse with chocolate-colored hair that was as thick as velvet, stubbornly refused to be harnessed; somebody a long, long time ago, it seemed, had said to him good-naturedly, "The road is fine to-day, sir, you won't notice how you'll cover it," while Kashintzev himself was at that very moment looking at the snowcovered plain, reddened by the setting sun. But all this mingled together and appeared to be at some dim, incredible distance, and it was impossible to recall, where, when, and in what sequence these events took place. At times a light slumber would overcome Kashintzev, and then in his clouded consciousness he would hear strange howls, the barking of dogs, cries and laughter and muttering, but as soon as he would open his eyes these fantastic sounds would immediately become transformed into the plain squeaking of the runners and the ringing of the bells on the shafts. And again, as before, the sleeping, white fields stretched to the right and to the left; again, before him was the black, bent back of the driver, and again the horses moved on monotonously, their tails tied in a knot that swung from side to side.</p>
			<p>"Where do you want to go, straight to the post-house or to the lodging-house? " asked the driver.</p>
			<p>Kashintzev raised his head. Now the sleigh was going down a long, straight street of a village. The road, already trampled down, shone in the moonlight like a highly polished blade of steel. On either side dark, pitiful huts, pressed down from above by heavy snow caps, were scarcely visible in the midst of snow piles. The village seemed dead; no dogs were barking, no light was seen in the windows, and no passers-by were in sight. There was something fearful and sad in this silence of human habitations, lost in the deep snow, and pressing together in fright.</p>
			<p>"The lodging-place? What's that?" asked Kashintzev.</p>
			<p>"Don't you know? The lodging-place that Movsha Khatzkel keeps.… The passengers always stay there. You can get tea there or an omelet or something like that.… You can even spend the night there.… There are five rooms for guests.…"</p>
			<p>"All right, take me there," agreed Kashintzev.</p>
			<p>Only now that he began to think of food and of the warm house, Kashintzev felt for the first time how cold and hungry he was. And the low, dark, snow-covered houses were running toward him and disappeared behind him, and it seemed that there was no end to them.</p>
			<p>"Aren't we ever going to get there?" Kashintzev asked impatiently.</p>
			<p>"Oh, yes, very soon. It's a big village. More than two versts and a half long.… Come along now!" shouted the driver in a hoarse and terrible voice as he stood up in the sleigh, swung his whip over the horses' heads, and tugged at the reins.</p>
			<p>A bright, red point appeared at a distance, growing larger and brighter, now concealed behind some unseen dark barriers, now appearing again for an instant amidst the surrounding darkness. Finally, the horses, as though they were mechanical toys whose springs had become unwound to the end, stopped of their own accord before the gates of the lodging-house and immediately lowered their heads almost to the ground, evidently exhausted by the long journey. The arched semicircular entrance extended like an immense black, gaping corridor through the whole length of the house; but beyond it, in the yard, one could see by the glittering light of the moon, dark wagons with their shafts lifted up, bundles of straw lying on the snow, and the silhouettes of horses standing in open sheds. On each side of the gates there was a window covered with the snow, but still shining with a warm, scarcely visible light.</p>
			<p>Some one opened the door, which squeaked shrilly on its hinges, and Kashintzev entered the room. The white clouds of cold air, which, it seemed, were only waiting for the opportunity, rushed in behind him, whirling madly. At first Kashintzev could not see anything, as his eye-glasses immediately became covered with moisture and he saw nothing before him but two dimly shining circles, glistening with all the colors of the rainbow.</p>
			<p>The driver, who had entered behind him, shouted:</p>
			<p>"Hey there, Movsha, a gentleman is here.… Where are you?"</p>
			<p>A short, stocky Jew with a light beard suddenly appeared from somewhere. He wore a high cap and a knit vest of the color of tobacco. He was still chewing something and was hastily drying his mouth with his hand.</p>
			<p>"Good evening, sir, good evening," said he in a friendly tone and immediately began to shake his head and smack his lips with an expression of deep sympathy and solicitude on his face. "My, my, my.… The gentleman is almost frozen to death, God forbid. Let me have your coat, please; I'll hang it on a nail. Will you have a samovar? Or something to eat, perhaps? My, how cold you are!"</p>
			<p>"Thank you, I'll have something to eat," said Kashintzev. He was still so cold that he could hardly move his lips. His chin became almost immovable, as though it were not his, and his feet seemed to him soft and weak and unfeeling, as though they were made of cotton.</p>
			<p>When the moisture had disappeared from his eyeglasses he began to look around. It was a large room with a bent window and an earthen floor. The wall was washed with light-blue lime, chipped off in many places and disclosing a worn-off lath-work of shingles. Along the walls stood narrow benches and crooked tables with their tops wet and greasy through long use. A large lamp was burning under the very ceiling. The back part of the room was partitioned off by a calico curtain, from behind which came the smell of dirty bedding, of children's clothes, and a pungent odor of some spiced food. In front of the curtain stood a wooden counter.</p>
			<p>At one of the tables, standing directly before Kashintzev, stood a peasant in a brown coat and sheepfur cap, his dishevelled head resting on the palms of his hands. He was drunk and was moving his head from side to side helplessly, hiccoughing and muttering something in an overstrained, hoarse, rattling voice.</p>
			<p>"Can you give me something to eat?" asked Kashintzev. "I am very hungry."</p>
			<p>Khatzkel raised his shoulders a little, spread out his arms, screwed up his left eye, and remained in that position for a few seconds.</p>
			<p>"What will I give you to eat?" asked he with a sly expression on his face. "And what will you have? You can get anything. I can get you a samovar, or boil you some eggs, or get some milk. Of course you know that one cannot get much in a small place like this. We can roast you a chicken, too; only that would take too long."</p>
			<p>"Let me have some eggs and some milk. What else will you give me?"</p>
			<p>"What else?" asked Khatzkel, as though astonished. "Of course I can offer you some fish prepared our way. But maybe you don't like Jewish cooking? You know it is just ordinary stuffed fish that my wife is getting ready for Saturday."</p>
			<p>"Let me have some fish, too, and a glass of whiskey, please."</p>
			<p>The Jew closed both his eyes, shook his head, and smacked his lips with regret.</p>
			<p>"We have no whiskey," he whispered. "You know that it is not allowed now. Are you going far?"</p>
			<p>"To Gusyatin."</p>
			<p>"And, if I may ask, you are not a police official, are you?"</p>
			<p>"No, I am a physician. A military surgeon."</p>
			<p>"Oh, a doctor! I am very glad of that. Believe me, I am very sorry that I cannot get you any whiskey. Still, let me see.… Etlya!" shouted Khatzkel, walking away from the table. "Etlya!"</p>
			<p>He disappeared behind the curtain and began to talk rapidly in Yiddish, as though he were angry. Several times in succession he appeared in the larger room and disappeared again as though he were in a hurry. At that moment the peasant, who was lounging at the table, suddenly raised his head with its open, moist lips and glassy eyes and began to sing in a hoarse voice while something snapped and rattled in his throat:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>"Oh, if we only could…"</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Khatzkel ran over to him and began to shake him by the shoulder.</p>
			<p>"Trokhim.… Listen, Trokhim.… Didn't I ask you not to make any disturbance here? See, the gentleman is offended.… You have had your drink. Now go home, Trokhim!"</p>
			<p>"Jews!" suddenly roared the peasant in a terrible voice and struck the table with his fist. "You Jews, the devil take you! I'll kill you!"</p>
			<p>His head again fell on the table, and he began to mutter something.</p>
			<p>Khatzkel jumped away from the table, his face perfectly pale. His lips were twitching in a contemptuous and at the same time confused and impotent smile.</p>
			<p>"Now you see, doctor, how I earn my living!" he said bitterly, turning to Kashintzev. "Well, now, tell me what can I do with a man like this! What can I do? Etlya!" shouted he in the direction of the curtain. "When are you going to get that fish ready?"</p>
			<p>He dived again into the curtained-off part of the room, but returned almost immediately carrying a platter on which lay a fish cut into thin slices with a dark sauce poured over it. He also brought with him a half-loaf of white bread with a hard outer crust, shaped in a twist and covered with black seeds of some aromatic spice.</p>
			<p>"Doctor," said Khatzkel mysteriously, "my wife found a little whiskey back there. Try it, it's good fruit-whiskey. We drink it at our Easter time, and it is even called Easter brandy; here it is."</p>
			<p>He took out of his waistcoat a small bottle with a narrow neck, and a wine-glass, and placed them on the table before Kashintzev. The brandy had a yellowish color and a slight odor of cognac, but when the doctor had swallowed a glass of it, it seemed to him that his whole mouth and throat became filled with some burning and aromatic vapor. Almost immediately he felt a cold sensation in his stomach, then the coldness turned into warmth, and he felt acute hunger. The fish proved to be very palatable and so spicy that it pinched his tongue.</p>
			<p>"How is it prepared, I wonder?" An anxious thought rushed through Kashintzev's mind, but he immediately began to laugh, recalling one of the familiar evening aphorisms of Doctor Von Rul: "One should never think of what one eats or whom one loves."</p>
			<p>Khatzkel was standing a little to one side, his hands behind his back. As though divining Kashintzev's thought, he said in a complacent, subservient tone:</p>
			<p>"Maybe you think that it wasn't prepared clean? Oh, no, never! Our Jewish women do everything in accordance with the Holy Books, and you have all the directions there how to clean, how to cut, how to wash your hands. And if something is not done that way, we consider it a sin. You don't have to worry about that. Etlya, bring some more fish."</p>
			<p>A woman appeared from behind the curtain and stood back of the counter, a large shawl thrown over her shoulders and partly over her head. When Kashintzev turned his face toward her it seemed to him that some invisible force suddenly struck him on the chest and some one's cold hand grasped his beating heart. Never before had he seen such resplendent, haughty, perfect beauty, nor even dared to think that it existed. Whenever he had happened to see beautiful faces on the paintings of famous artists he was always firmly convinced that such correct, faultlessly beautiful faces do not exist in nature, that they are merely figments of the artist's creative imagination. And all the more amazing, all the more incredible to him was this blindingly beautiful face which he now saw in the dirty lodging-house, all filled with the odor of filth, in this cold room, back of the wooden counter, but a few steps away from the drunken, snoring, and hiccoughing peasant.</p>
			<p>"Who is this?" Kashintzev whispered as though to himself. "Who is this…" he was going to say, "Jewess," according to his custom, but stopped in time and said, "this woman?"</p>
			<p>"Who? This?" said Khatzkel indifferently, making a motion with his head. "Why, that's my wife."</p>
			<p>"How beautiful she is!"</p>
			<p>Khatzkel burst into a short laugh and then shrugged his shoulders with contempt.</p>
			<p>"Are you making fun of me?" asked he in a tone of slight reproach. "What is she? Just an ordinary, poor Jewess. That's all. Didn't you see really beautiful women in the large cities? Etlya!" He suddenly turned to his wife and said something rapidly in Yiddish. She laughed, disclosing a row of white, even teeth, and raised one shoulder so high that it seemed as if she wanted to brush it against her cheek.</p>
			<p>"And is the gentleman single or married?" asked Khatzkel with insinuating cautiousness.</p>
			<p>"I'm single. Why?"</p>
			<p>"Oh, I just asked.… So you are single. And why, if I may ask, did not the gentleman who is so dignified and well educated wish to get married?"</p>
			<p>"Well, it's a long story.… All sorts of reasons. And then, I guess it isn't too late even now. I'm not so very old, eh?"</p>
			<p>Suddenly Khatzkel moved close to the doctor, and said, looking around cautiously and lowering his voice significantly:</p>
			<p>"And maybe the gentleman will spend the night here? You needn't be afraid, the best gentlemen always stop here with me; Mr. Varpakhovsky from Monastyrishche, and Mr. Lutzky, and officers, too, sometimes.…"</p>
			<p>"No, I have to go. I am in a hurry."</p>
			<p>But Khatzkel, with a sly, penetrating, and tempting air, continued to insist:</p>
			<p>"I assure you it would be better for you to stay, doctor. Where will you go in such awful cold? May I not live till to-morrow, if I am lying! And listen to me, doctor.… There is a former governess here.…"</p>
			<p>A fleeting, mad thought flashed through Kashintzev's mind. He threw a rapid, stealthy look at Etlya, who, pretending that she did not know of what her husband and the traveller were talking, was looking indifferently at the snow-covered window. But at that moment Kashintzev experienced a strong feeling of shame.</p>
			<p>"That's enough, go away!" he ordered Khatzkel sternly.</p>
			<p>Not so much by his words, but by the whole expression of his face, Kashintzev understood what Khatzkel was referring to, but he could not become angry, as he, no doubt, would have considered it his duty to become had this taken place under different circumstances. The warmth of the room, especially after his long journey in the cold, had affected him and made him feel a slight weakness all over his body. The whiskey he had drunk made him just a little dizzy, and his face glowed pleasantly. What he was craving for at that moment was to be able to sit indefinitely, without stirring, experiencing that languid feeling of satiety, warmth, and slight intoxication, and not to think that a few minutes later he would have to get into his sleigh again and resume his endless, monotonous, cold journey.</p>
			<p>And in that strange, light, and blissful condition, he felt an inexpressible joy in occasionally, as though by accident, and deceiving himself into the thought that it was accidental, resting his gaze on the beautiful face of the Jewess, and to think about her, but not with thoughts, rather with words, as though he were conversing with some unseen companion.</p>
			<p>"Can you describe this face to another?" Kashintzev was saying in his mind. "Can you describe in the ordinary, poor, every-day language those amazing features, those delicate and bright tints? Now she has again turned to me, almost with her full face. How clear, how amazingly delicate is that line which runs from her temple to her ear, and then down to the chin, outlining the cheek. The forehead is low, overgrown on the sides of the temples with light, fluffy hair. How beautiful this is, how feminine, how colorful! Her eyes are enormous and black, so enormous and black that they seem to have been drawn, while around the pupils shine transparent dots of living gold, like bright beams in a yellow topaz. The eyes are surrounded with a dark, slightly moist shadow, and this dark tone, that lends her gaze an air of indolence and passion, merges almost imperceptibly into the swarthy, healthy glow of her cheeks. Her lips are full, red, and, although closed at this moment, they seem open, craving for a kiss, while on the slightly shaded upper lip there is a pretty little black mole, near the corner of the mouth. How straight, how noble is her nose, and how thin, how haughty her nostrils! Oh, how beautiful she is!" Kashintzev repeated this to himself, and he felt a desire to weep for the joy and the tenderness that suddenly took possession of him — pressing his bosom and almost bringing tears to his eyes.</p>
			<p>Over the bright roses of her dark complexion one could see streaks of dried dirt, but it seemed to Kashintzev that no carelessness could possibly dim or detract from, her glorious, triumphant beauty. He also noted that when she came from behind the counter, the bottom of her short, pink calico skirt was wet and heavy with mud, while on her feet were enormous, shabby shoes with outstanding flaps; he saw that when she spoke with her husband she pulled the tip of her nose with two fingers, emitting an indefinite sound, and then drew her index-finger across her nostrils. And yet nothing vulgar, nothing ludicrous and pitiful, could detract one mite from her perfect beauty.</p>
			<p>"What is happiness?" Kashintzev asked himself, and then immediately replied: "The only happiness is to possess a woman like this, to know that this divine beauty is yours. Hm.… 'To possess' is a vulgar word that a hussar would use, but what is one's career, ambition, philosophy, fame, convictions, public questions in comparison with this? A year or two will go by, and perhaps I shall be married. My wife will be of a noble family, a lean, blond girl with thin curls on her head, well educated and quite hysterical, with a narrow pelvis and a cold, bluish, pimpled skin; she will play the piano, discuss all sorts of problems, suffer all kinds of woman's diseases, and we both will probably feel a sexual indifference, if not actual aversion to each other. And who knows? Perhaps the whole purpose, the whole reason, the whole joy of my life is to take possession, by means fair or foul, of a woman like this: to steal her, take her away, tempt her — what difference does it make how? Let her be filthy, ignorant, unrefined, greedy — good Lord! How insignificant are all these trifles in comparison with her marvellous beauty!"</p>
			<p>Khatzkel approached him again, stopped near Kashintzev, put his hands in his pockets and sighed.</p>
			<p>"Maybe you have read what they write in the papers?" he asked with polite caution. "Anything new about the war?"</p>
			<p>"Nothing has changed. We are defeated at every step, still retreating.… However, I have not seen to-day's paper," replied Kashintzev.</p>
			<p>"You have not read! Isn't that too bad? We live in a wilderness here and know nothing of what is going on in the world. They wrote something about the Zionists. You've read about the congress that's going to meet at Paris, haven't you?"</p>
			<p>"Yes, of course."</p>
			<p>Kashintzev looked at him more attentively. Watching him, one could feel under his external quickness and readiness something that spoke of weariness, weakness, poverty, oppression, malnutrition. The most pitiful impression was produced by his long neck that extended out of his knit scarf. It was thin, of dirty-yellow color; on each side of the throat, like a thick cord, stretched a long, swollen vein, with an indentation in the middle.</p>
			<p>"How do you make your living here?" asked Kashintzev, suddenly seized with pity, and feeling as though he had been at fault.</p>
			<p>"Well," Khatzkel shrugged his shoulders with an expression of hopelessness and contempt. "What can a poor Jew do in the Pale? Get along some way or other. On the market-days we buy and sell, snatching the last piece of bread from each other. Oh, well! What's the use of talking? As though anybody is interested in knowing how we suffer here!…"</p>
			<p>He dropped his hand wearily and went behind the curtain, while Kashintzev returned again to his broken chain of thought. Those thoughts of his were like the moving, many-colored half-words, half-images, that come to a man in the morning, when he is on the border between sleep and wakefulness, and which, until he is entirely awake, seem so thin, so obediently light, and, at the same time, so full of the profoundest importance.</p>
			<p>Never did Kashintzev experience such pleasure in dreaming as now, when under the influence of warmth and satiety, he sat with his back against the wall, with his legs stretched out before him. A large part in this pleasure of his was played by an indefinite point in the design of the bright curtain. Whenever he would find it and his eyes linger on it, his thoughts would immediately begin to flow evenly, freely, and clearly, without tarrying in his head, leaving no traces in it and bringing with them some quiet, tinkling joy. Then everything would disappear in a bluish, trembling haze: the walls of the guest-room, the crooked tables, the dirty counter. Only the beautiful face still remained, and Kashintzev saw it and felt it, although what he was actually looking at was an indefinite point, utterly unknown to him.</p>
			<p>"How remarkable, how incomprehensible is this Hebrew people!" thought Kashintzev. "What trials does fate still hold in store for it? It has gone through tens of centuries, without mixing with any others, disdainfully isolating itself from other nations, preserving in its heart its age-long sorrow and its age-long flame. The variegated, colossal life of Rome and Greece and Egypt has long, long become the possession of museum collections, a delirium of history, a far-away tale, but this mysterious people, which was already a patriarch in the days of their infancy, not only exists, but has preserved everywhere its strong, fiery, southern type, its faith, full of great hopes and trifling customs — has preserved the holy language of its divinely inspired books, has preserved its mystical alphabet, the very tracings of which breathe of thousand-year-old antiquity! What was the story of its youth? With whom did it trade, conclude treaties, wage war? Nowhere have any traces remained of all those problematic Philistines, Amalekites, Moabites, and other half-mythical peoples, while it still lives, elastic and immortal, as though fulfilling some superhuman preordainment. Its history is full of tragic horror and is all covered with its own blood; enslavement that lasted for centuries, violence, hatred, tortures, bonfires of human flesh, banishment, arbitrary oppression.… How could it remain alive? Or are there really some mysterious purposes, unintelligible to us, in the fate of nations? Who knows? Perhaps some Higher Force has willed that the Hebrews, after losing their own native land, should play the part of eternal yeast in the gigantic process of the world fermentation?</p>
			<p>"Here is this woman in whose face there is reflected that divine beauty which inspires with holy rapture. For how many centuries did this people have to abstain from intermingling with other nations in order to preserve these marvellous Biblical features? With just such a plain kerchief on her head, with just such deep eyes and a fold of sorrow near her lips, is the mother of Jesus Christ pictured in our representations of her. With the same faultlessly pure beauty shone gloomy Judith, and meek Ruth, and gentle Leah, and beautiful Rachel, and Agar, and Sarah. Looking at her, you believe, feel, and almost see how this people ascends in its dizzying genealogy to Moses, rises up to Abraham, and still higher and higher to the great, terrible, vengeful, Biblical God himself!</p>
			<p>"With whom did I argue recently?" suddenly recalled Kashintzev. "It was about the Jews. I guess it was with the colonel of the General Staff in the railroad-train. Or was it with the municipal physician from Stepan? He said: 'The Jews have grown enfeebled, the Jews have lost their nationality and their native land, the Jewish people must degenerate, as not a single drop of fresh blood reaches it. One of two alternatives remains for it: either to merge with the other nations and become lost in their midst, or to perish.…' At that time I could find no arguments to oppose him, but now I would have brought him to this woman standing behind the counter and would have said to him: 'Here is the guarantee of the immortality of the Hebrew people!' Let Khatzkel be weak, and pitiful, and sickly; let it be that his ceaseless struggle with life has stamped his face with the cruel traces of rascality, timidity, and lack of confidence; for thousands of years he has been 'getting on somehow or other,' gasping for breath in the ghettos of the world. But the Jewish woman preserves the spirit and the type of the race, bears, gently and carefully, through streams of blood, under the oppression of violence, the sacred fire of the people's genius and will never let it die out. Now I look at her and feel that beyond her the black abyss of ages opens before me. There is a miracle here, a divine mystery. And I, myself — a savage but yesterday, if a cultured man to-day — what significance do I have in her eyes — what significance do I have next to this living enigma, perhaps the most inexplicable and the greatest in the whole history of mankind?"</p>
			<p>Suddenly Kashintzev awoke. There was excitement in the room. Khatzkel rushed from window to window and, with his hands against his temples, tried to see something in the darkness beyond the panes. Etlya was pulling the drunken peasant by the collar of his coat, with an expression of aversion and anger on her face, while he now raised, now lowered his red, insensible face bloated with sleep, with pouches under his eyes, and made a wild, rattling noise in his throat.</p>
			<p>"Listen now, Trokhim! Listen! I ask you to get up!" the Jewess said impatiently in a corrupted Little-Russian dialect.</p>
			<p>"<i>Sh-sh!</i> The police commissary!" suddenly came from Khatzkel in a frightened whisper. He smacked his lips rapidly, shook his head in despair, then, rushing to the door, opened it just at the moment when a tall police official entered it, and freed his head from the thick sheep-fur collar of his coat.</p>
			<p>"Now listen, Trokhim. Get up!" exclaimed Etlya in a tragic whisper.</p>
			<p>The peasant raised his bloodshot face, and with his mouth slanting to one side, roared:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>"Oh, if we only could…"</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>"What's this?" shouted the official, rolling his eyes threateningly. He threw his sheep-fur coat in rage into Khatzkel's hands and, swelling out his chest, made a step or two forward, in the magnificent style of an opera generalissimo.</p>
			<p>The peasant rose from his seat, his hands, feet, and whole body catching against the table. Something like conscious fear came over his bluish, bloated face.</p>
			<p>"Your Hono… your… Hono…" he began to mutter, still standing on the same spot in indecision.</p>
			<p>"Get out!" suddenly roared the official in such a thunderous voice that the nervous Kashintzev shuddered at his table. "Get right out of here!"</p>
			<p>The peasant made an attempt to move forward and extended his hands to catch the official's hand and kiss it, but Khatzkel was already dragging him toward the door by the collar of his coat.</p>
			<p>"So!" the official continued to rage, his eyes still sparkling with anger as he turned to Etlya. "Selling brandy without permission? Receiving horse-thieves? Just wait! I'll…"</p>
			<p>The woman raised high her shoulders, bent her head to one side, and closed her eyes with a pitiful and submissive expression, as though awaiting a blow from above. Kashintzev felt that the chain of his light, pleasant, and important thoughts had suddenly broken, never to be reunited, and he was ill at ease, ashamed of himself because of those thoughts.</p>
			<p>"May God strike me on the spot, your Honor!" Etlya was swearing with passionate persuasiveness. "May I be struck blind, and not be able to see tomorrow and my own children! Your Honor knows yourself.… Well, what can I do when a drunken peasant comes here? My husband is a sickly man, and I am a weak, poor woman."</p>
			<p>"All right," the official interrupted her sternly. "That's enough."</p>
			<p>At that moment he noticed Kashintzev and immediately turned toward him, throwing his head back with a victorious and stern expression, threw his chest forward and brushed his fine, light beard to the right and to the left. But suddenly a smile appeared on his face.</p>
			<p>"Basil Basilich! My dear old crocodile! What wind carried you here?" exclaimed he in a theatrically joyful tone. "The devil knows how long I have not seen you!… Oh, I beg your pardon!" He suddenly paused at the table. "I must have made a mistake."</p>
			<p>He touched the visor of his cap with his hand. Half rising from his seat, Kashintzev did the same, though rather clumsily.</p>
			<p>"I beg your pardon.… I took you for my colleague, the commissary at Pochaynov. Such a fatal coincidence. Once more, I beg your pardon.… However, you know, there is such a remarkable similarity of form that.… Still, permit me to introduce myself: the local police commissary, and, so to speak, the god of thunder, Pavel Afinogenych Irisov."</p>
			<p>Kashintzev rose again and introduced himself.</p>
			<p>"Well, if it has all occurred in such an extraordinary fashion, won't you permit me to join you?" said Irisov, again touching the visor of his cap and striking his heels together. "I am very glad, very glad, indeed, to meet you. Hey, Khatzkel, bring that leather case from the carriage. It is in front, under the seat. May I ask, doctor, if you are going far?"</p>
			<p>"To Gusyatin. I've just been appointed there."</p>
			<p>"Oh, yes! The infantry regiment? There are some pretty good fellows among the officers, though they drink like horses! It's a rather sorry little place, but something like a large city, when judged by our local standards. So that means that we shall meet occasionally? The pleasure will be mine, I am sure.… Just now… ha-ha!… you were a witness of an exercise of paternal authority, so to speak, on my part."</p>
			<p>"Yes.… Somewhat," said Kashintzev, forcing himself to smile.</p>
			<p>"What can you do? What can you do? That's my way. I like to be stern.… You know, I hate all sorts of complaints and coercion, and that kind of nonsense. I've got my own way of dealing with these things."</p>
			<p>The police official was a man of good presence, as ladies in a small town would call it — handsome, tall, with long side-whiskers like those of General Skobelev, and a high, white, tranquil forehead. His eyes were of a beautiful, blue color, but full of languor, that seemed unmanly, almost indecent, capricious. His whole face was of a gentle, even, porcelain-pinkish tint, and his bright-red lips moved and stretched coquettishly, like two red worms. Everything pointed to the fact that Irisov was the handsome man of the locality, the heart-eater — a former cavalry officer, perhaps, surely a card-player and reveller, capable of dispensing with sleep for three nights at a stretch and of never becoming intoxicated. He spoke rapidly and distinctly, making his face take on the expression of exaggerated attention when the other man spoke, but really listening only to himself.</p>
			<p>"I am a father to them all, but a stern parent," continued the official, pointing up impressively with his index-finger. "Put the case on the table, Khatzkel; that's it. I am stern, it is true, and do not allow any one to walk over me, as others do, but I know by heart every one of my… <i>he-he-he…</i> subjects, so to speak. You saw that peasant just now, didn't you? That's Trofim, a peasant from Oryekh, and his surname is the Tail. Do you think that I don't know that he is a horse-thief? I know it very well! Only just now, I say nothing, but one fine May morning — ding!… And Trofim the Tail will be suddenly taken out of circulation. Now look at this same Khatzkel. Just a plain, ordinary, rotten little Jew, isn't he? Yet I know every little thing he does, the rascal. What? Don't I speak the truth, Khatzkel?"</p>
			<p>"My good Lord, as though your Honor could speak anything but the truth!" came from Khatzkel, in a tone of servile reproach. "All of us, poor, unfortunate Jews pray to God all the time for our great commissary. And we say among ourselves: 'What do we need parents for, when our dear, beloved commissary is kinder to us than our own fathers could be?'"</p>
			<p>"Did you hear that?" asked the commissary carelessly, pointing his thumb over his shoulder at Khatzkel and screwing up his eyes significantly. "The voice of the people! But don't worry, I hold them right here. What? Don't I speak the truth?"</p>
			<p>"What shall I say to that?" Khatzkel seemed all shrunk together, as he almost squatted down, extending his hands before him, as though pushing away some monstrous, unjust accusation. "Why, before we have time to think of something, his Honor the commissary already knows it all."</p>
			<p>"Did you hear that? " asked Irisov briefly. "'Won't you?' said Sabakevich," said he, pointing to the open chest. "Will you have some roasted duck? It's a fine duck, prepared at home! And here are some pancakes with fish and onions. There is some rum. Have no doubts about that, it is real Jamaica rum, and even smells of bedbugs.… And this — now please don't make fun of me — this is chocolate. Fit for the ladies only, so to speak. But let me recommend it to you; it's the most nourishing thing on a journey. I've had occasion to learn this through bitter experience, so to speak, because of my thankless occupation. Please.…"</p>
			<p>Kashintzev refused the refreshments politely, but the commissary was insistent. He was finally compelled to drink a glass of rum, which smelled of anything but rum. Kashintzev felt sad and ill at ease. From time to time he threw a stealthy glance at Etlya, who was discussing something with her husband in an animated tone, behind the counter. Her fantastic fascination had already left her. Something pitiful, downtrodden, dreadful in its every-day modernity was now seen in her face, though it still remained just as touchingly beautiful as before.</p>
			<p>"Oh, yes! I see where you're aiming!" the commissary suddenly said mischievously, chewing his meat, his moist, soft lips moving succulently. "A pretty little Jewess, eh?"</p>
			<p>"Unusually pretty! Beautiful!" exclaimed Kashintzev involuntarily.</p>
			<p>"Y-yes.… Good stuff. But!…" The commissary spread his hands, heaved an artificial sigh, and closed his eyes for a second. "But you cannot do</p>
			<p>anything. We have already tried it. There is no physical possibility. Can't do it. Your eyes see it, but.… But wait, I am going to ask now. Hey, Khatzkel, <i xml:lang="und">Kimmér</i>.…"</p>
			<p>"For God's sake, please don't do it!" Kashintzev made a gesture of entreaty with his hand as he rose from his bench. "Please don't!"</p>
			<p>"Oh, nonsense.… Khatzkel!"</p>
			<p>But at that moment the door opened, and the driver on duty entered the room with the whip in his hands and his three-cornered cap on his head.</p>
			<p>"Which of the gentlemen ordered horses to Gusyatin?" asked he. But, noticing the police commissary, he hastily pulled off his cap and roared a military salute.</p>
			<p>"Hello, Yurko," answered Irisov condescendingly. "Too bad you cannot stay a little," said he to the physician with regret. "It's so rare that one has a chance of conversing with an educated man."</p>
			<p>"You must excuse me, I am in a hurry," Kashintzev said, hastily buttoning up his coat. "You know yourself what duty is. What is my bill?"</p>
			<p>He settled for his meal, and shuddering at the thought of the cold, dark night and of the tiresome journey before him, went toward the door. He still preserved the childish, naïve habit of telling fortunes by trifling signs and, his hand already on the door-knob, thought: "If she looks at me, then it will take place." But what was going to take place he himself did not know, just as he did not know the name for that feeling of boredom, weariness, and undefinable disappointment which was oppressing him. But the woman did not turn around. She stood there, with her marvellous antique profile turned toward him, her face illumined brightly by the lamp, and was busily arranging something on the counter, with her eyes lowered.</p>
			<p>"Good-by," said Kashintzev, opening the door.</p>
			<p>Thick clouds of steam rushed in from the street, concealed the beautiful face, and struck the physician with a sensation of cold. The post-horses stood at the steps, their heads sadly lowered.</p>
			<p>They went past the village, crossed the frozen river, and then again the long, melancholy road, with dead, white fields to the right and to the left stretched before them. Kashintzev dozed off. And immediately the same strange and deceiving sounds spoke and sang in front of the sleigh and behind it and to either side. A pack of dogs barking long and shrilly, a human crowd stamped heavily, childish laughter jingled, the little bells lisped rapidly, as though they were mad, yet saying distinctly: "The first thing is sternness, sternness!</p>
			<p>And this sounded like the commissary's voice.</p>
			<p>Kashintzev's elbow struck against the side of the sleigh and he awoke.</p>
			<p>On the sides of the road tall, dark trunks of pine-trees ran toward him, their branches weighted down with heavy snow, arching over the roadway like immense white paws. Among them, far ahead, one seemed to see tall, thin, stately columns, fences, balconies, high white walls with black Gothic windows, the fantastic outlines of a sleeping, bewitched palace. But the road made a turn, and the phantom palace disappeared, turning into dark rows of trees, with an overhanging canopy of snow-covered branches.</p>
			<p>"Where am I? Where am I going?" Kashintzev asked himself with perplexity and fright. "What was it that had just happened to me? It was something big, and joyful, and important."</p>
			<p>In his memory there rose, with amazing clearness, the beautiful face of that woman, its tender contours of cheeks and chin, its moist, calmly passionate eyes, the fascinating curve of her flower-like lips.… And suddenly his whole life, that which was already past and that which still lay ahead of him, presented itself to him just as lonely and sad as this dark road at night, with its boredom, cold, emptiness, and desolation, with its irritating illusions.</p>
			<p>By a mere chance, the impelling beauty of a strange, unknown woman had shed its rays into his soul and warmed it, filled it with happiness, with wonderful thoughts and pleasant anxiety; but this bit of his life had already gone past, disappeared behind him, and nothing remained of it but a recollection, just like that of a disappearing light of a casual station. And there is no other light ahead; the horses are running at an even pace, and the indifferent driver — Time — dozes indifferently on his seat.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
